# 5 The Comforter

### by C.H. Spurgeon

January 21, 1855

> “But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you.”  
— *John 14:26*

Good old Simeon called Jesus the consolation of Israel, and so He was. Before His actual appearance, His name was the Day-Star, cheering the darkness, and prophetic of the rising sun. To Him they looked with the same hope which cheers the nightly watcher, when from the lonely castle top he sees the fairest of the stars, and hails her as the usher of the morn. When He was on earth, He must have been the consolation of all those who were privileged to be His companions. We can imagine how readily the disciples would run to Christ to tell Him of their griefs, and how sweetly with that matchless intonation of His voice, He would speak to them and bid their fears be gone. Like children, they would consider Him as their Father, and to Him every want, every groan, every sorrow, every agony, would at once be carried, and He, like a wise physician, had a balm for every wound, He had mingled a cordial for their every care, and readily did He dispense some mighty remedy to allay all the fever of their troubles. Oh! it must have been sweet to have lived with Christ. Surely sorrows then were but joys in masks, because they gave an opportunity to go to Jesus to have them removed. Oh! would to God, some of us may say, that we could have lain our weary heads upon the bosom of Jesus, and that our birth had been in that happy era, when we might have heard His kind voice, and seen His kind look, when He said, “Let the weary ones come unto Me.”

But now He was about to die. Great prophecies were to be fulfilled, and great purposes were to be answered, and therefore Jesus must go. It behooved Him to suffer, that He might be made a propitiation for our sins. It behooved Him to slumber in the dust awhile, that He might perfume the chamber of the grave to make it—

<p align="center">
    <i>“No more a charnel house to fence<br>The relics of lost innocence.”</i>
</p>

It behooved Him to have a resurrection, that we who shall one day be the dead in Christ, might rise first, and in glorious bodies stand upon earth. And it behooved Him that He should ascend up on high, that He might lead captivity captive, that He might chain the fiends of hell, that He might lash them to His chariot wheels and drag them up high heaven’s hill, to make them feel a second overthrow from His right arm when He should dash them from the pinnacles of heaven down to deeper depths beneath. “It is right I should go away from you,” said Jesus, “for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come.” Jesus must go. Weep you disciples. Jesus must be gone. Mourn you poor ones who are to be left without a Comforter. But hear how kindly Jesus speaks, “I will not leave you comfortless, I will pray the Father, and He shall send you another Comforter, who shall be with you, and shall dwell in you forever.” He would not leave those few poor sheep alone in the wilderness, He would not desert His children and leave them fatherless. Albeit that He had a mighty mission which did fill His heart and hand, albeit that He had so much to perform that we might have thought that even His gigantic intellect would be overburdened, albeit He had so much to suffer, that we might suppose His whole soul to be concentrated upon the thought of the sufferings to be endured, yet it was not so, before He left, He gave soothing words of comfort, like the good Samaritan, He poured in oil and wine, and we see what He promised, “I will send you another Comforter—One who shall be just what I have been, yea even more, who shall console you in your sorrows, remove your doubts, comfort you in your afflictions, and stand as My vicar on earth, to do that which I would have done, had I tarried with you.”

Before I discourse of the Holy Ghost as the Comforter, I must make one or two remarks on the different translations of the word rendered “Comforter.” The Rhemish translation, which you are aware is adopted by Roman Catholics, has left the word untranslated, and gives it “Paraclete.” “But the Paraclete which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things.” This is the original Greek word, and it has some other meanings besides “Comforter.” Sometimes it means the monitor or instructor, “I will send you another monitor, another teacher.”Frequently it means “Advocate,” but the most common meaning of the word is that which we have here, “I will send you another *Comforter*.” However, we cannot pass over those other two interpretations without saying something upon them.

“I will send you another *teacher*.” Jesus Christ had been the official teacher of His saints while on earth. They called no man Rabbi except Christ. They sat at no men’s feet to learn their doctrines, but they had them direct from the lips of Him who “spoke as never man spoke.” “And now,” says He, “when I am gone, where shall you find the great infallible teacher? Shall I set you up a Pope at Rome, to whom you shall go and who shall be your infallible oracle? Shall I give you the councils of the church to be held to decide all knotty points?” Christ said no such thing. “I am the infallible paraclete or teacher, and when I am gone, I will send you another teacher and He shall be the person who is to explain Scripture, He shall be the authoritative oracle of God, who shall make all dark things light, who shall unravel mysteries, who shall untwist all knots of revelation, and shall make you understand what you could not discover, had it not been for His influence.” And beloved, no man ever learns anything aright, unless he is taught of the Spirit. You may learn election, and you may know it so that you shall be damned by it, if you are not taught of the Holy Ghost, for I have known some who have learned election to their soul’s destruction, they have learned it, so that they said they were of the elect, whereas they had no marks, no evidences and no work of the Holy Ghost in their souls. There is a way of learning truth in Satan’s college, and holding it in licentiousness, but if so, it shall be to your souls as poison to your veins, and prove your everlasting ruin.

No man can know Jesus Christ unless he is taught of God. There is no doctrine of the Bible which can be safely, thoroughly, and truly learned, except by the agency of the one authoritative teacher. Ah! tell me not of systems of divinity, tell me not of schemes of theology, tell me not of infallible commentators, of most learned and most arrogant doctors, but tell me of the Great Teacher, who shall instruct us, the sons of God, and shall make us wise to understand all things. He is *the* Teacher, it matters not what this or that man says, I rest on no man’s boasting authority, nor will you. You are not to be carried away with the craftiness of men, nor sleighs of words, this is the authoritative oracle, the Holy Ghost resting in the hearts of His children.

The other translation is *advocate.* Have you ever thought how the Holy Ghost can be said to be an advocate? You know Jesus Christ is called the wonderful, the counselor and mighty God, but how can the Holy Ghost be said to be an advocate? I suppose it is thus, He is an advocate on earth to plead against the enemies of the cross. How was it that Paul could so ably plead before Felix and Agrippa? How was it that the apostles stood unawed before the magistrates and confessed their Lord? How has it come to pass that in all times God’s ministers have been made fearless as lions, and their brows have been firmer than brass, their hearts sterner than steel, and their words like the language of God? Why, it is simply for this reason, that it was not the man who pleaded, but it was God the Holy Ghost pleading through him. Have you never seen an earnest minister, with hands uplifted, and eyes dropping tears, pleading with the sons of men? Have you never admired that portrait from the hand of old John Bunyan? A grave person with eyes uplifted to heaven, the best of books in his hand, the law of truth written on his lips, the world behind his back, standing as if he pleaded with men and a crown of gold hanging over his head. Who gave that minister so blessed a manner and such goodly matter? Whence came his skill? Did he acquire it in college? Did he learn it in a seminary? Ah! No, he learned it of the God of Jacob, he learned it of the Holy Ghost, for the Holy Ghost is the great counselor who teaches us how to advocate His cause aright.

But, besides this, the Holy Ghost is the advocate in men’s hearts. Ah! I have known men reject a doctrine until the Holy Ghost began to illumine them. We who are the advocates of the truth are often very poor pleaders, we spoil our cause by the words we use, but it is a mercy that the brief is in the hand of a special pleader, who will advocate successfully and overcome the sinner’s opposition. Did you ever know Him to fail once? Brethren, I speak to your souls, has not God in old times convinced you of sin? Did not the Holy Ghost come and prove that you were guilty, although no minister could ever get you out of your self-righteousness? Did He not advocate Christ’s righteousness? Did He not stand and tell you that your works were filthy rags? and when you had well-nigh still refused to listen to His voice, did He not fetch hell’s drum and make it sound about your ears, bidding you look through the vista of future years and see the throne set, and the books open, the sword brandished, and hell burning, and fiends howling, and the damned shrieking forever? and did He not thus convince you of the judgment to come? He is a mighty advocate when He pleads in the soul—of sin, of righteousness, and of the judgment to come. Blessed advocate! plead in my heart, plead with my conscience. When I sin, make conscience bold to tell me of it, when I err, make conscience speak at once, and when I turn aside to crooked ways, then advocate the cause of righteousness, and bid me sit down in confusion, knowing my guiltiness in the sight of God.

But there is yet another sense in which the Holy Ghost advocates, and that is, He advocates our cause with Jesus Christ, with groaning that cannot be uttered. O my soul, you are ready to burst within me! O my heart, you are swelled with grief, the hot tide of my emotion would well-nigh overflow the channels of my veins. I long to speak, but the very desire chains my tongue. I wish to pray, but the fervency of my feeling curbs my language. There is a groaning within that cannot be uttered. Do you know who can utter that groaning, who can understand it, and who can put it into heavenly language and utter it in a celestial tongue, so that Christ can hear it? Oh! yes, it is God the Holy Ghost, He advocates our cause with Christ, and then Christ advocates it with His Father. He is the advocate, who makes intercession for us, with groanings that cannot be uttered.

Having thus explained the Spirit’s office as teacher and advocate, we come now to the translation of our version—the *Comforter,* and here I shall have three divisions. First, the *COMFORTER,* secondly, the *COMFORT,* and thirdly, the *COMFORTED.*