# 3 The Sin of Unbelief

### by C.H. Spurgeon

January 14, 1855

> “And that lord answered the man of God, and said, Now, behold, if the LORD should make windows in heaven, might such a thing be? And he said, Behold, you shall see it with your eyes, but shall not eat thereof.”  
— *2 Kings 7:19*

One wise man may deliver a whole city, one good man may be the means of safety to a thousand others. The holy ones are “the salt of the earth,” the means of the preservation of the wicked. Without the godly as a conserve, the race would be utterly destroyed. In the city of Samaria there was one righteous man—Elisha, the servant of the Lord. Piety was altogether extinct in the court. The king was a sinner of the blackest dye, his iniquity was glaring and infamous. Jehoram walked in the ways of his father Ahab, and made unto himself false gods. The people of Samaria were fallen like their monarch, they had gone astray from Jehovah, they had forsaken the God of Israel, they remembered not the watchword of Jacob, “The LORD your God is one God,” and in wicked idolatry they bowed before the idols of the heathens, and therefore the Lord of Hosts suffered their enemies to oppress them until the curse of Ebal was fulfilled in the streets of Samaria, for “the tender and delicate woman who would not adventure to set the sole of her foot upon the ground for delicateness,” had an evil eye to her own children and devoured her offspring by reason of fierce hunger (Deuteronomy 28:56-58). In this awful extremity the one holy man was the medium of salvation. The one grain of salt preserved the entire city, the one warrior for God was the means of the deliverance of the whole beleaguered multitude. For Elisha’s sake the Lord sent the promise that the next day, food which could not be obtained at any price, should be had at the cheapest possible rate—at the very gates of Samaria. We may picture the joy of the multitude when first the seer uttered this prediction. They knew him to be a prophet of the Lord, he had divine credentials, all his past prophecies had been fulfilled. They knew that he was a man sent of God and uttering Jehovah’s message. Surely the monarch’s eyes would glisten with delight, and the emaciated multitude would leap for joy at the prospects of so speedy a release from famine. “Tomorrow,” would they shout, *“tomorrow* our hunger shall be over, and we shall feast to the full.”

However, the lord on whom the king leaned expressed his disbelief. We hear not that any of the common people, the plebeians, ever did so, but an aristocrat did it. Strange it is that God has seldom chosen the great men of this world. High places and faith in Christ do seldom well agree. This great man said, “Impossible!” and, with an insult to the prophet, he added, “If the Lord should make windows in heaven, might such a thing be.” His sin lay in the fact that after repeated seals of Elisha’s ministry, he yet disbelieved the assurances uttered by the prophet on God’s behalf. He had, doubtless, seen the marvelous defeat of Moab, he had been startled at tidings of the resurrection of the Shunamite’s son, he knew that Elisha had revealed Benhadad’s secrets and smitten his marauding hosts with blindness, he had seen the bands of Syria decoyed into the heart of Samaria, and he probably knew the story of the widow, whose oil filled all the vessels and redeemed her son, at all events the cure of Naaman was common conversation at court, and yet, in the face of all this accumulated evidence, in the teeth of all these credentials of the prophet’s mission, he yet doubted and insultingly told him that heaven must become an open casement ere the promise could be performed. Whereupon God pronounced his doom by the mouth of the man who had just now proclaimed the promise, “You shall see it with your eyes but shall not eat thereof.” And providence—which always fulfils prophecy, just as the paper takes the stamp of the type—destroyed the man. Trodden down in the streets of Samaria, he perished at its gates beholding the plenty, but tasting not of it. Perhaps his carriage was haughty and insulting to the people, or he tried to restrain their eager rush, or, as we would say, it might have been by mere accident that he was crushed to death, so that he saw the prophecy fulfilled, but never lived to enjoy it. In his case, seeing was believing, but it was not enjoying.

I shall this morning invite your attention to two things—the man’s *SINS* and his *PUNISHMENT*. Perhaps I shall say but little of this man, since I have detailed the circumstances, but I shall discourse upon the sin of unbelief and the punishment thereof.

<p align="center"><b>I</b></p>

And first, the SIN.

His sin was *unbelief.* He doubted the promise of God. In this particular case unbelief took the form of a doubt of the divine veracity, or a mistrust of God’s power. Either he doubted whether God really meant what He said, or whether it was within the range of possibility that God should fulfill His promise. Unbelief has more phases than the moon and more colors than the chameleon. Common people say of the devil that he is seen sometimes in one shape and sometimes in another. I am sure this is true of Satan’s first-born child—unbelief, for its forms are legion. At one time I see unbelief dressed out as an angel of light. It calls itself humility and it says, “I would not be presumptuous, I dare not think that God would pardon me, I am too great a sinner.” We call that humility and thank God that our friend is in so good a condition. I do not thank God for any such delusion. It is the devil dressed as an angel of light, it is unbelief after all.

At other times we detect unbelief in the shape of a doubt of God’s immutability, “The Lord has loved me, but perhaps He will cast me off tomorrow. He helped me yesterday and under the shadows of His wings I trust, but perhaps I shall receive no help in the next affliction. He may have cast me off, He may be unmindful of His covenant and forget to be gracious.” Sometimes this infidelity is embodied in a doubt of God’s power. We see every day new straits, we are involved in a net of difficulties and we think, “Surely the Lord cannot deliver us.” We strive to get rid of our burden and finding that we cannot do it, we think God’s arm is as short as ours, and His power as little as human might. A fearful form of unbelief is that doubt which keeps men from coming to Christ, which leads the sinner to distrust the ability of Christ to save him, to doubt the willingness of Jesus to accept so great a transgressor.

But the most hideous of all is the traitor, in its true colors, blaspheming God and madly denying His existence. Infidelity, deism, and atheism, are the ripe fruits of this pernicious tree, they are the most terrific eruptions of the volcano of unbelief. Unbelief has become of full stature, when quitting the mask and laying aside disguise, it profanely stalks the earth, uttering the rebellious cry, “No God,” striving in vain to shake the throne of the divinity, by lifting up its arm against Jehovah and in its arrogance would—

<p align="center">
    <i>“Snatch from His hand the balance and the rod,<br>Rejudge His justice—be the god of God.”</i>
</p>

Then truly unbelief has come to its full perfection, and then you see what it really is, for the least unbelief is of the same nature as the greatest.

I am astonished, and I am sure you will be, when I tell you that there are some strange people in the world who do not believe that unbelief is a sin. Strange people I must call them, because they are sound in their faith in every other respect, only, to make the articles of their creed consistent, as they imagine, they deny that unbelief is sinful. I remember a young man going into a circle of friends and ministers, who were disputing whether it was a sin in men that they did not believe the Gospel. While they were discussing it he said, “Gentlemen am I in the presence of Christians? Are you believers in the Bible, or are you not?” They said, “We are Christians of course.” “Then,” he said, “does not the Scripture say, ‘of sin, because they believed not on me?’ And is it not the damning sin of sinners that they do not believe on Christ?” I could not have thought that persons should be so foolhardy as to venture to assert that, “It is no sin for a sinner not to believe on Christ.” I thought that however far they might wish to push their sentiments, they would not tell a lie to uphold the truth, and in my opinion, this is what such men are really doing. Truth is a strong tower and never requires to be buttressed with error. God’s Word will stand against all man’s devices. I would never invent a sophism to prove that it is no sin on the part of the ungodly not to believe, for I am sure it is, when I am taught in the Scriptures that, “This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world and men love darkness rather than light,” and when I read, “He that believes not is condemned already, because he believes not on the Son of God,” I affirm and the Word declares it, *unbelief is a sin*. Surely with rational and unprejudiced persons, it cannot require any reasoning to prove it. Is it not a sin for a creature to doubt the word of its Maker? Is it not a crime and an insult to the Divinity, for me, an atom, a particle of dust, to dare to deny His words? Is it not the very summit of arrogance and extremity of pride for a son of Adam to say, even in his heart, “God I doubt Your grace, God I doubt Your love, God I doubt Your power”? Oh! sirs believe me, could you roll all sins into one mass—could you take murder, and blasphemy, and lust, adultery, and fornication, and everything that is vile, and unite them all into one vast globe of black corruption, they would not equal even then the sin of unbelief. This is the monarch sin, the quintessence of guilt, the mixture of the venom of all crimes, the dregs of the wine of Gomorrah, it is the A-1 sin, the masterpiece of Satan, the chief work of the devil.

I shall attempt this morning, for a little while, to show the extremely evil nature of the sin of unbelief.

**1.** And first the sin of unbelief will appear to be extremely heinous when we remember that *it is the parent of every other iniquity*. There is no crime which unbelief will not beget. I think that the fall of man is very much owing to it. It was in this point that the devil tempted Eve. He said to her, “Yea, *has* God said, you shall not eat of every tree of the garden?” He whispered and insinuated a doubt, “Yea, *has* God said so?” As much as to say, “Are you *quite* sure He said so?” It was by means of unbelief—that thin part of the wedge—that the other sin entered, curiosity and the rest followed, she touched the fruit and destruction came into this world. Since that time, unbelief has been the prolific parent of all guilt. An unbeliever is capable of the vilest crime that ever was committed. Unbelief, sirs! why it hardened the heart of Pharaoh—it gave license to the tongue of blaspheming Rabshakeh—yea, it became a deicide and murdered Jesus. Unbelief!—it has sharpened the knife of the suicide! it has mixed many a cup of poison, thousands it has brought to the halter, and many to a shameful grave, who have murdered themselves and rushed with bloody hands before their Creator’s tribunal because of unbelief. Give me an unbeliever—let me know that he doubts God’s Word—let me know that he distrusts His promise and His threatening, and with that for a premise, I will conclude that the man shall, by and by unless there is amazing restraining power exerted upon him, be guilty of the foulest and blackest crimes. Ah! this is a Beelzebub sin, like Beelzebub, it is the leader of all evil spirits. It is said of Jeroboam that he sinned and made Israel to sin, and it may be said of unbelief that it not only sins itself, but makes others sin, it is the egg of all crime, the seed of every offense, in fact everything that is evil and vile lies couched in that one word—unbelief.

And let me say here that unbelief in the Christian is of the same nature as unbelief in the sinner. It is not the same in its final issue, for it will be pardoned in the Christian, yea it is pardoned, it was laid upon the scapegoat’s head of old, it was blotted out and atoned for, but it is of the same sinful nature. In fact, if there can be one sin more heinous than the unbelief of a sinner, it is the unbelief of a saint. For a saint to doubt God’s Word—for a saint to distrust God after innumerable instances of His love, after ten thousand proofs of His mercy, exceeds everything. In a saint, moreover, unbelief is the root of other sins. When I am perfect in faith, I shall be perfect in everything else, I should always fulfill the precept if I always believe the promise. But it is because my faith is weak that I sin. Put me in trouble and if I can fold my arms and say, “JEHOVAH-JIREH, the Lord will provide,” you will not find me using wrong means to escape from it. But let me be in temporal distress and difficulty, if I distrust God, what then? Perhaps I shall steal, or do a dishonest act to get out of the hands of my creditors, or if kept from such a transgression, I may plunge into excess to drown my anxieties. Once take away faith, the reins are broken, and who can ride an unbroken steed without rein or bridle? Like the chariot of the sun, with Phaeton for its driver, such should we be without faith. Unbelief is the mother of vice, it is the parent of sin, and, therefore, I say it is a pestilent evil—a master sin.